Suriname is the smallest sovereign state in South America, and has a population of around 560,000.  In total, DFID has allocated £75 million for the Caribbean from 2011 until 2015. As part of this, Suriname will benefit from our regional programmes to help the Caribbean prepare for and reduce the risk from climate change and natural disasters.   The UK also contributes to multilateral organisations that carry out a wide range of projects and programmes in the Caribbean. In 2010, UK contributions that benefited Suriname amounted to £2,013,000.

We are helping governments in the Caribbean region to plan ahead for possible disasters and to integrate risk reduction into their policy and investment decisions, for example through a climate change risk atlas in Suriname. Knowing what problems they might face will make it easier for them to make a case for action, mobilise resources to scale up their efforts and ensure development gains are not lost. We are also developing affordable insurance for small businesses and farmers to protect their assets and livelihoods when disaster strikes.

Many people in Suriname live close to the coast, or in places that are vulnerable to the threat of storms, flooding and rising sea levels. UK aid will provide training at community level through the Red Cross, as well as practical measures such as safer buildings and improved water management. We are also developing affordable insurance for small businesses and farmers across the Caribbean to protect their assets and livelihoods when disaster strikes.

In line with its aim of reducing poverty, DFID is also contributing from its regional budget to three major programmes designed to create jobs and increase exports across the Caribbean:

£10 million for the COMPETE Caribbean scheme, delivered jointly with the Inter-American Development Bank and the Canadian International Development Agency, which will reduce red tape, streamline regulation, and help local firms break into new markets. COMPETE Caribbean is providing US$500,000  to improve Suriname’s investment climate, by prioritising and implementing reforms needed to boost economic growth and diversify the economy.

£10 million for CARTFund, a special fund to help Caribbean countries and their own regional integration initiative, CSME (the CARICOM Single Market and Economy) take advantage of a trade deal with the European Union. CARTFund helps in testing for product standards and provides support to the tourism, speciality foods and accounting sectors. In Suriname, the programme has provided US$403,590 to help increase community-based tourism and other economic initiatives among the indigenous population. 

£4 million contribution to CARTAC, the IMF regional technical assistance mission. This provides advice and training for all English-speaking countries in macroeconomic management, monetary and taxation policy, statistics and debt management.